Clarifies that processProposal may be called for set of transactions different from the one returned in the preceding prepareProposal (#1033)
cometbft/cometbft: spec/abci/abci++_basic_concepts.md

More details on managing state across connections can be found in the section on
[Managing Application State](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements.md#managing-the-application-state-and-related-topics).

## Proposal related timeouts

> `PrepareProposal` and `ProcessProposal` stand on the consensus algorithm critical path,

Reviewer: Overall, I like this write-up more than the previous one.

Just on thing: you're introducing `ProcProp` in the reasoning, but the problem is way less serious with `ProcProp` than with `PrepProp`:

* At the beginning of a round, all non-proposers will schedule `TimeoutPropose` immediately
* however, with `ProcProp` the `TimeoutPropose` timeout is only scheduled after having received 2/3 of all prevotes. In practice, since the block tends to take a similar time to run at all validators, when a validator schedules `TimeoutPropose` it is likely to be about to finish its own `ProcProp` execution.

IOW, the _real_ problem is `PrepProp` and `TimeoutPropose`

Author: Good point, @sergio-mena. Let me rephrase it to remove ProcProp.

Reviewer: > all non-proposers will schedule TimeoutPropose immediately

Actually, that's wrong as we saw on Fri (it's true in the arXiv paper, but not in the code)

i.e., CometBFT cannot make progress while these methods are being executed.
Hence, if the Application takes a long time preparing a proposal or in verifying it,
the default values of *TimeoutPropose* and *TimeoutPrevote* might not be sufficient
to accommodate these methods' executions and validator nodes might time out and prevote `nil`.
The proposal, in this case, will probably be rejected and a new round will be necessary.

> If this happens successively, the liveness of CometBFT might be compromised.

Reviewer: If the implementation of `PrepProp` and `ProcProp` are bounded in time, we don't introduce liveness problems (the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate), but performance problems (unwanted rounds).

Reviewer: > Ah, this is a very important information. What happens if the application doesn't reply on time? What is proposed?

CometBFT blocks until the application replies (similarly to `FinalizeBlock`). It's a **sync** ABCI call

Reviewer 2: So, timeout prevote does not apply here, as it is only triggered when the node receives 2/3+ votes that do not form a quorum.

Reviewer 2: > I still feel we shouldn't say that liveness is compromised (but performance is degraded). Thoughts?

I think it affects liveness somehow. The point is that timeouts are increasing, so eventually they become big enough so that to include the processing time involved on these calls.

Author: > > I still feel we shouldn't say that liveness is compromised (but performance is degraded). Thoughts?
> 
> I think it affects liveness somehow. The point is that timeouts are increasing, so eventually they become big enough so that to include the processing time involved on these calls.

Good point. At some point then proposals will be made before the other validators prevote nil and eventually we decide. I agree with you that it is not a liveness issue, but a performance one. A potentially very painful one, since the timeout values are reset for each new round.

## Proposal related timeouts

`PrepareProposal` stands on the consensus algorithm critical path,
i.e., CometBFT cannot make progress while this method is being executed.
Hence, if the Application takes a long time preparing a proposal,
the default value of *TimeoutPropose* might not be sufficient
to accommodate the method's execution and validator nodes might time out and prevote `nil`.
The proposal, in this case, will probably be rejected and a new round will be necessary.
If this happens successively, the liveness of CometBFT might be compromised.

Operators will need to adjust the default value of *TimeoutPropose* in CometBFT's configuration file,
in order to suit the needs of the particular application being deployed.

This is particularly important if applications implement *immediate execution*, a technique in

> which applications require the proposer to execute a block in `PrepareProposal` (and all validators to execute it in `ProcessProposal`) to ensure that all transactions are executable in case the block is decided.

Reviewer 2: Can you break this line please?

Reviewer 2: Actually, the validators have to verify the block execution in `ProcessProposal`.

Reviewer 2: I didn't understand the second part of the sentence, starting from "to ensure that..."

Author: We need to agree on how to break lines, if at the 80 or 100 char mark or something else.
I prefer breaking into periods, even if it makes lines longer.

I didn't catch this comment.
> Actually, the validators have to verify the block execution in ProcessProposal.

Do you mean that I should say validate instead of execute?
I guess I just expanded "validate" to "execute a block (...) to ensure all transactions are executable in case the block is decided."

Reviewer 2: We can have two cases here:
1. Everyone executes the block in `ProcessProposal`, as a pre-execution that will actually be confirmed when the block is finally committed
2. The proposes execute the block on `PrepareProposal`, encodes somehow the results of the execution on the block itself, and non-proposers have to check whether the proposer's execution is valid, in `ProcessProposal`

I think we should discourage option 2, because it adds a lot of complexity and corner cases. My suggestion can be just to mention case 1 here.

Author: We need to agree on how to break lines, if at the 80 or 100 char mark or something else.
I prefer breaking into periods, even if it makes lines longer.

I didn't catch this comment.
> Actually, the validators have to verify the block execution in ProcessProposal.

Do you mean that I should say validate instead of execute?
I guess I just expanded "validate" to "execute a block (...) to ensure all transactions are executable in case the block is decided."

Reviewer 2: > to ensure that all transactions are executable in case the block is decided.

This part I really don't get: are we executing txs to ensure they can be executed? If we are executing them now, we don't execute them again upon Commit. Upon commit we only check whether the block that we previously executed is the same block that has been committed. If this is not the case, we execute the block on Commit replacing the (optimistic) execution we performed upon `ProcessProposal`.

any other kind of request. This is the only way to ensure all nodes see the same
transactions and compute the same results.

> Some Applications may choose to execute blocks asynchronously to optimistically speed

Reviewer: Did you mean synchronously?
If you execute blocks asynchronously, then you can't reject the invalid blocks.
Or maybe I'm not fully understanding

Reviewer: Remember, what we achieve with immediate execution is the 100% guarantee that no TX included in a block will fail.
The app may choose to execute the block in parallel by replying `ACCEPT` right away, but then it cannot reject blocks based on its execution (in the current version of ABCI).

Author: I really meant asynchronouusly, by replying ACCEPT right away. I modified the previous change to explicitly call out immediate execution (maybe a better name would be early execution) and the following change to discuss both immediate execution and optimistic/asynchronous/parallel execution.

Reviewer: Ok I'll re-read in the next pass

any other kind of request. This is the only way to ensure all nodes see the same
transactions and compute the same results.

Applications that implement immediate execution (execute the blocks
that are about to be proposed, in `PrepareProposal`, or that require validation, in `ProcessProposal`) produce a new state before a block is decided.
The state changes caused by processing those
proposed blocks must never replace the previous state until `FinalizeBlock` confirms
that the proposed block was decided and `Commit` is invoked for it.

> The same is true to Applications that quickly accept blocks and execute the blocks optimistically in parallel with the remainder consensus steps to save time during `FinalizeBlock`; they must only apply state changes in `Commit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same is true to Applications that quickly accept blocks and execute the blocks optimistically in parallel with the remaining consensus steps to save time during `FinalizeBlock`; they must only apply state changes in `Commit`.
```

Thanks for improving the wording here

any other kind of request. This is the only way to ensure all nodes see the same
transactions and compute the same results.

Applications that implement immediate execution (execute the blocks
that are about to be proposed, in `PrepareProposal`, or that require validation, in `ProcessProposal`) produce a new state before a block is decided.
The state changes caused by processing those
proposed blocks must never replace the previous state until `FinalizeBlock` confirms

> the block decided and `Commit` is invoked in it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that the proposed block was decided and `Commit` is invoked for it.
```
